Add OpenTelemetry plugin for gateway 3.0 (#4154)
Kong/docs.konghq.com: app/_hub/kong-inc/opentelemetry/_index.md

      default: 5000
      datatype: number
      description: |
        The timeout in milliseconds for the reading of the response from the OTLP server.
---

The OpenTelemetry plugin is build on top of Kong's tracing API,
and is intended to be fully compatible with the OpenTelemetry specification.

## Usage

**NOTE:**
The OpenTelemetry plugin only works with Kong's configuration `opentelemetry_tracing` enabled.

The OpenTelemetry is fully compatible with the OpenTelemetry specification, and can be used with any OpenTelemetry compatible backend.

There are two ways to set up an OpenTelemetry backend:
1. Using a OpenTelemetry compatible backend directly, like Jaeger (v1.35.0+).
   All the vendors supported by OpenTelemetry are listed in the [OpenTelemetry's Vendor support](https://opentelemetry.io/vendors/).
2. Using the OpenTelemetry Collector, which is a middleware that can be used to proxy OpenTelemetry spans to a compatible backend.
   All the OpenTelemetry Collector exporters are available on [open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-collector-contrib/tree/main/exporter).

### Set up {{site.base_gateway}}

> Enable the OpenTelemetry tracing capability in Kong's configuration:

Author: basicly two requirements:
1. set the kong.conf `opentelemetry_tracing`
2. enable the `opentelemetry` plugin

> - `opentelemetry_tracing = all`, Valid values can be found in the [Kong's configuration](/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#opentelemetry_tracing).

Author: The configuration is exist on the https://github.com/Kong/kong-ee/blob/master/kong.conf.default#L106 file, but I don't know how to generate the docs.
So do the tracing pdk, need to run the `autodoc` to generate new sections for pdk changes in 3.0.

> - `opentelemetry_tracing = all`, Valid values can be found in the [Kong's configuration](/gateway/latest/reference/configuration/#opentelemetry_tracing).

Reviewer: It looks like the autodocs will be generated automatically with the 3.0 release, so that section should be published then.

- `opentelemetry_tracing_sampling_rate = 1.0`, Tracing instrumentation sampling rate.
  Tracer samples a fixed percentage of all spans following the sampling rate.
  Set to lower values to reduce the impact of the instrumentation on Kong's proxy performance in production.

### Set up a OpenTelemetry compatible backend

This section is optional if you are using a OpenTelemetry compatible APM vendor.
All the vendors supported by OpenTelemetry are listed in the [OpenTelemetry's Vendor support](https://opentelemetry.io/vendors/).

Jaeger [natively supports OpenTelemetry](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/features/#native-support-for-opentracing-and-opentelemetry) since v1.35, and can be used with the OpenTelemetry plugin.

Deploy a Jaeger instance with Docker:

```bash
docker run --name jaeger \
  -e COLLECTOR_OTLP_ENABLED=true \
  -p 16686:16686 \
  -p 4317:4317 \
  -p 4318:4318 \
  jaegertracing/all-in-one:1.36
```

The `COLLECTOR_OTLP_ENABLED` environment variable must be set to `true` to enable the OpenTelemetry Collector.

> The `4318` port is the OTLP/HTTP port, and the `4317` port is the OTLP/GRPC port which OpenTelemetry plugin not supported yet.

Author: Can we use `the `4317` port is the OTLP/GRPC port that isn't supported by OpenTelemetry plugin yet.`?
OpenTelemetry is spec, and the OpenTelemetry plugin is the implemetation.

The top level span will have the following attributes:
- `http.method` - HTTP method
- `http.url` - HTTP URL
- `http.host` - HTTP host
- `http.scheme` - HTTP scheme (http or https)
- `http.flavor` - HTTP version
- `net.peer.ip` - Client IP

<!-- TODO: link to Gateway 3.0 tracing docs for details -->

### Propagation

The OpenTelemetry plugin will propagate the following headers:
- `w3c` - [W3C trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/)
- `b3`, `b3-single` - [Zipkin headers](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation)
- `jaeger` - [Jaeger headers](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/client-libraries/#propagation-format)
- `ot` - [OpenTracing headers](https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/rfc/trace_identifiers.md)
- `datadog` - [Datadog headers](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/agent/propagation/)

The plugin will detect the propagation format from the headers, and will use the appropriate format to propagate the span context.
If no appropriate format is found, the plugin will fallback to the default format, which is `w3c`.

### OTLP exporter

> The OpenTelemetry plugin implemented the [OTLP/HTTP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md#otlphttp) exporter, which uses Protobuf payloads encoded in binary format and send via HTTP/1.1.

Author: Yes! Thanks!

---
name: OpenTelemetry
publisher: Kong Inc.
version: 0.1.0
desc: Propagate spans and report space to a backend server through OTLP protocol.
description: |
  Propagate distributed tracing spans and report low-level spans to a OTLP-compatible server.
type: plugin
categories:
  - analytics-monitoring
kong_version_compatibility:
  community_edition:
    compatible:
      - 3.0.x
  enterprise_edition:
    compatible:
      - 3.0.x
params:
  name: opentelemetry
  konnect_examples: false
  protocols:
    - http
    - https
  dbless_compatible: 'yes'
  config:
    - name: endpoint
      required: true
      value_in_examples: 'http://opentelemetry.collector:4318/v1/traces'
      datatype: string
      description: |

>         The full HTTP(S) endpoint that {{site.base_gateway}} should send OpenTelemetry spans to.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        The full HTTP(S) endpoint that Kong Gateway should send OpenTelemetry spans to.
```

        The endpoint must be a [OTLP/HTTP](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/protocol/otlp.md#otlphttp) endpoint.
    - name: headers
      required: false
      datatype: map
      value_in_examples:
        - X-Auth-Token:secret-token
      description: |
        The custom headers to be added in the HTTP request sent to the OTLP server.
        It's useful to add the authentication headers (token) for the APM backend.
    - name: resource_attributes
      required: false
      datatype: map
      description: |
        The attributes specified on this property are added to the OpenTelemetry resource object.

>         {{site.company_name}} follows the OpenTelemetry specification for [Semantic Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        Kong follows the OpenTelemetry specification for [Semantic Attributes](https://github.com/open-telemetry/opentelemetry-specification/blob/main/specification/resource/semantic_conventions/README.md#service).
```

        The following attributes are automatically added to the resource object:
        - `service.name`: The name of the service. This is `kong` by default.

>         - `service.version`: The version of {{site.base_gateway}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `service.version`: The version of Kong Gateway.
```

>         - `service.instance.id`: The node id of {{site.base_gateway}}.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        - `service.instance.id`: The node id of Kong Gateway.
```

      default: 1000
      datatype: number
      description: |
        The timeout, in milliseconds, for the OTLP server connection.
    - name: send_timeout
      default: 5000
      datatype: number
      description: |
        The timeout, in milliseconds, for sending spans to the OTLP server.
    - name: read_timeout
      default: 5000
      datatype: number
      description: |
        The timeout, in milliseconds, for reading the response from the OTLP server.
---

The OpenTelemetry plugin is built on top of {{site.base_gateway}}'s tracing API
and is intended to be fully compatible with the OpenTelemetry specification.

## Usage

{:.note}
> **Note**: The OpenTelemetry plugin only works when {{site.base_gateway}}'s `opentelemetry_tracing` configuration is enabled.

The OpenTelemetry plugin is fully compatible with the OpenTelemetry specification and can be used with any OpenTelemetry compatible backend.

There are two ways to set up an OpenTelemetry backend:
* Using a OpenTelemetry compatible backend directly, like Jaeger (v1.35.0+)
   All the vendors supported by OpenTelemetry are listed in the [OpenTelemetry's Vendor support](https://opentelemetry.io/vendors/).

> 2. Using the OpenTelemetry Collector, which is middleware that can be used to proxy OpenTelemetry spans to a compatible backend.

Author: ```suggestion
* Using the OpenTelemetry Collector, which is middleware that can be used to proxy OpenTelemetry spans to a compatible backend.
```

```

## How the OpenTelemetry plugin functions

This section describes how the OpenTelemetry plugin works.

### Built-in tracing instrumentations

{{site.base_gateway}} has a series of built-in tracing instrumentations
which are configured by the `opentelemetry_tracing` configuration.

{{site.base_gateway}} creates a top-level span for each request by default when `opentelemetry_tracing` is enabled.

The top level span has the following attributes:
- `http.method`: HTTP method
- `http.url`: HTTP URL
- `http.host`: HTTP host
- `http.scheme`: HTTP scheme (http or https)
- `http.flavor`: HTTP version
- `net.peer.ip`: Client IP address

<!-- TODO: link to Gateway 3.0 tracing docs for details -->

### Propagation

The OpenTelemetry plugin propagates the following headers:
- `w3c`: [W3C trace context](https://www.w3.org/TR/trace-context/)
- `b3` and `b3-single`: [Zipkin headers](https://github.com/openzipkin/b3-propagation)
- `jaeger`: [Jaeger headers](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/client-libraries/#propagation-format)
- `ot`: [OpenTracing headers](https://github.com/opentracing/specification/blob/master/rfc/trace_identifiers.md)

> - `datadog`: [Datadog headers](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/agent/propagation/)

Author: ```suggestion
- `datadog`: [Datadog headers](https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/agent/propagation/) (Enterprise only)
```
